[Docs][PyOV] Documentation for Custom Python Operation (#25615)
openvinotoolkit/openvino: docs/articles_en/documentation/openvino-extensibility/custom-openvino-operations.rst

                 custom operations to support models with operations
                 not supported by OpenVINO.

OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box.  A custom operation might be implemented both in C++ and Python.```

Also it is possible to create a shared library with custom operation implemented in C++ first and load it using ``add_extension`` API. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Operation Class
###############

.. tab-set::

>     .. tab-item:: C++

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: C++
```

      :sync: cpp

>       To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

      To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:
```

      4. Override the ``clone_with_new_inputs`` method, which enables graph manipulation routines to create copies of this operation and connect it to different nodes during optimization.

      5. Override the ``visit_attributes`` method, which enables serialization and deserialization of operation attributes. An ``AttributeVisitor`` is passed to the method, and the implementation is expected to walk over all the attributes in the op using the type-aware ``on_attribute`` helper. Helpers are already implemented for standard C++ types like ``int64_t``, ``float``, ``bool``, ``vector``, and for existing OpenVINO defined types.

      6. Override ``evaluate`` method, which enables fallback of some devices to this implementation and the application of constant folding if there is a custom operation on the constant branch. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.

>     .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
>       To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``openvino.Op``, which is in turn derived from ``openvino.Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``openvino.Op`` you need to import it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py
      
      To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``openvino.Op``, which is in turn derived from ``openvino.Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``openvino.Op`` you need to import it.
```

                 custom operations to support models with operations
                 not supported by OpenVINO.

OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box.  A custom operation might be implemented both in C++ and Python.```

Also it is possible to create a shared library with custom operation implemented in C++ first and load it using ``add_extension`` API. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Operation Class
###############

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: C++

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      :sync: cpp
```

      To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:

>       :sync: cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:
> 
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.hpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:common_include]
>       
>       Follow the steps below to add a custom operation:
> 
>       1. Add the ``OPENVINO_OP`` macro. The type info of an operation consists of a string operation identifier and a string for operation version.
> 
>       2. Implement default constructor and constructors that optionally take the operation inputs and attributes as parameters.
> 
>       3. Override the shape inference method ``validate_and_infer_types``. This method is called multiple times during graph manipulations to determine the shapes and element types of the operations outputs. To access the input shapes and input element types, use the ``get_input_partial_shape()`` and ``get_input_element_type()`` methods of ``ov::Node``. Set the inferred shape and element type of the output using ``set_output_type``.
> 
>       4. Override the ``clone_with_new_inputs`` method, which enables graph manipulation routines to create copies of this operation and connect it to different nodes during optimization.
> 
>       5. Override the ``visit_attributes`` method, which enables serialization and deserialization of operation attributes. An ``AttributeVisitor`` is passed to the method, and the implementation is expected to walk over all the attributes in the op using the type-aware ``on_attribute`` helper. Helpers are already implemented for standard C++ types like ``int64_t``, ``float``, ``bool``, ``vector``, and for existing OpenVINO defined types.
> 
>       6. Override ``evaluate`` method, which enables fallback of some devices to this implementation and the application of constant folding if there is a custom operation on the constant branch. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    .. tab-item:: Python

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      :sync: py
```

      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:common_include]

      Follow the steps below to add a simple custom operation:

      1. Define the ``__init__`` method to initialize the class with inputs and attributes.

      2. Override the shape inference method ``validate_and_infer_types``. This method is called multiple times during graph manipulations to determine the shapes and element types of the operations outputs. To access the input shapes and input element types, use the ``get_input_partial_shape()`` and ``get_input_element_type()`` methods of ``openvino.Node``. Set the inferred shape and element type of the output using ``set_output_type``.

      3. Override the ``visit_attributes`` method, which enables serialization and deserialization of operation attributes. An ``AttributeVisitor`` is passed to the method, and the implementation is expected to walk over all the attributes in the op using the type-aware ``on_attribute`` helper. Helpers are already implemented for standard types like ``int``, ``float``, ``bool``, ``vector``, and for existing OpenVINO defined types.

>       4. Override ``evaluate`` method, which enables fallback of a CPU device to this implementation and the application of constant folding if there is a custom operation on the constant branch. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      4. Override ``evaluate`` method with the code that will run when this operation is encountered in the model graph during the model inference. It works only for CPU device and enables OpenVINO runtime to run your arbitrary Python code as a part of model inference. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method which returns `True`, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.
```

      5. Override the ``clone_with_new_inputs``, which is an optional method that graph manipulation routines to create copies of this operation and connect it to different nodes during optimization.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.hpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:common_include]
      
      Follow the steps below to add a custom operation:

      1. Add the ``OPENVINO_OP`` macro. The type info of an operation consists of a string operation identifier and a string for operation version.

      2. Implement default constructor and constructors that optionally take the operation inputs and attributes as parameters.

      3. Override the shape inference method ``validate_and_infer_types``. This method is called multiple times during graph manipulations to determine the shapes and element types of the operations outputs. To access the input shapes and input element types, use the ``get_input_partial_shape()`` and ``get_input_element_type()`` methods of ``ov::Node``. Set the inferred shape and element type of the output using ``set_output_type``.

      4. Override the ``clone_with_new_inputs`` method, which enables graph manipulation routines to create copies of this operation and connect it to different nodes during optimization.

      5. Override the ``visit_attributes`` method, which enables serialization and deserialization of operation attributes. An ``AttributeVisitor`` is passed to the method, and the implementation is expected to walk over all the attributes in the op using the type-aware ``on_attribute`` helper. Helpers are already implemented for standard C++ types like ``int64_t``, ``float``, ``bool``, ``vector``, and for existing OpenVINO defined types.

      6. Override ``evaluate`` method, which enables fallback of some devices to this implementation and the application of constant folding if there is a custom operation on the constant branch. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.

```

                 custom operations to support models with operations
                 not supported by OpenVINO.

OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box.  A custom operation might be implemented both in C++ and Python.```

> Also it is possible to create a shared library with custom operation implemented in C++ first and load it in Python using ``add_extension`` API. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Reviewer 2: The meaning was changed. In the old piece there is a context: "if you are using Python". Here there is no such context, so it looks like `add_extension` is used in Python only. `add_extension` can be used in both C++ and Python, there is no bias.

Author: Actually this method is also available in JS API, so I think I can omit mentioning the language here altogether

> Also it is possible to create a shared library with custom operation implemented in C++ first and load it in Python using ``add_extension`` API. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Reviewer 2: > using both the C++ API and Python API.

Looks like a mix of languages. Should be OR?

Author: updated

Operation Class
###############

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: C++

      To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:

      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.hpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:common_include]
      
      Follow the steps below to add a custom operation:

>       1. Add the ``OPENVINO_OP`` macro which defines a ``NodeTypeInfo`` object that identifies the type of the operation to the graph users and helps with dynamic type resolution. The type info of an operation currently consists of a string operation identifier and a string for operation version.

Reviewer 2: ``NodeTypeInfo`` looks like a low-level detail that is not needed for the user.

> ...currently consist...
Remove currently.

Author: it's a C++ part, I didn't change here nothing, just moved it under the tab

Reviewer 2: So do we need another round to fix it for C++? Indeed, more fixes needed for both C++ API and documentation (independently).

Author: well, I update this line :)

         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:common_include]

      Follow the steps below to add a simple custom operation:

      1. Define the ``__init__`` method to initialize the class with inputs and attributes.

      2. Override the shape inference method ``validate_and_infer_types``. This method is called multiple times during graph manipulations to determine the shapes and element types of the operations outputs. To access the input shapes and input element types, use the ``get_input_partial_shape()`` and ``get_input_element_type()`` methods of ``openvino.Node``. Set the inferred shape and element type of the output using ``set_output_type``.

      3. Override the ``visit_attributes`` method, which enables serialization and deserialization of operation attributes. An ``AttributeVisitor`` is passed to the method, and the implementation is expected to walk over all the attributes in the op using the type-aware ``on_attribute`` helper. Helpers are already implemented for standard types like ``int``, ``float``, ``bool``, ``vector``, and for existing OpenVINO defined types.

      There are some methods that can also be overridden if needed:

>       4. Override the ``clone_with_new_inputs`` method, which enables graph manipulation routines to create copies of this operation and connect it to different nodes during optimization.

Reviewer 2: The description doesn't provide any reason why this function is optional. If I don't implement it, what does happen?

Author: the default ones will be called.
but overall I removed this phrase

Reviewer 2: So, now `clone_with_new_inputs` is mandatory according to the documentation? That was one of the things we were trying to fix for Python (this is one of the "Python Exclusives" in this case). And now we are not emphasizing it.

Author: I've edited the sentence and added remark that it is optional

>       5. Override ``evaluate``, which is an optional method that enables fallback of some devices to this implementation and the application of constant folding if there is a custom operation on the constant branch. If your operation contains ``evaluate`` method you also need to override the ``has_evaluate`` method, this method allows to get information about availability of ``evaluate`` method for the operation.

Reviewer 2: Well, `evaluate` is the main reason why we need to define a custom Python op. Exactly for `fallback of some devices to this implementation`. So we literally want to run this op as a part of the graph, and this is the main purpose of the recent advances in Python Op. So, technically, it is optional, but for the main use case -- it is mandatory.

Reviewer 2: Please use a more direct language to express meaning of this Python op: a way to run an arbitrary Python code as part of OpenVINO model graph. Highlight that this is available for CPU only.

Author: @slyalin `Highlight that this is available for CPU only.`
Am I right that it is correct also for C++ API?

Reviewer 2: Correct. But it was a feature requested for GPU for a long time. So it is one of the things that can be enabled automatically for all devices, but the code itself still will be executed on the CPU. But I hope we will move further and enable, for example, Python custom operation implemented in Triton and run them natively on GPU as well.

                 custom operations to support models with operations
                 not supported by OpenVINO.

> OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box. This capability requires writing code in C++, so if you are using Python to develop your application you may need to build a separate shared library implemented in C++ first and load it in Python using ``add_extension`` API. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class.

Author: ```suggestion
OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box. While this process historically involved writing C++ code and constructing a separate shared library to be subsequently loaded into Python using the ``add_extension`` API, it is now also possible to implement custom operations directly within the Python API.

For those who still wish to use C++, the capability to create a shared library with custom operation implementations is maintained. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.
```

                 custom operations to support models with operations
                 not supported by OpenVINO.

> OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box. While this process historically involved writing C++ code and constructing a separate shared library to be subsequently loaded into Python using the ``add_extension`` API, it is now also possible to implement custom operations directly within the Python API with some known limitations. Operations implemented in python still won't be loaded into the runtime and may be used for building your own Model. 

Reviewer 2: Remove retrospective statements.

Reviewer 2: I do not understand this sentence that is also used in other places: "Operations implemented in python still won't be loaded into the runtime". That's not correct. Or you are trying to describe something that I don't understand.

Author: updated

> OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box. While this process historically involved writing C++ code and constructing a separate shared library to be subsequently loaded into Python using the ``add_extension`` API, it is now also possible to implement custom operations directly within the Python API with some known limitations. Operations implemented in python still won't be loaded into the runtime and may be used for building your own Model. 

Author: ```suggestion
OpenVINO™ Extension API allows you to register custom operations to support models with operations which OpenVINO™ does not support out-of-the-box.  A custom operation might be implemented both in C++ and Python (with some known limitations).```

> For those who still wish to use C++, the capability to create a shared library with custom operation implementations is maintained. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Reviewer 2: C++ extensions and libraries with such extensions are the first class citizen in OV, there shouldn't be any "still" or "is maintained", I think.

Author: updated

> For those who still wish to use C++, the capability to create a shared library with custom operation implementations is maintained. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.

Author: ```suggestion
For those who wish to use C++, the capability to create a shared library with custom operation implementations is available. Please refer to :ref:`Create library with extensions <create_a_library_with_extensions>` for more details on library creation and usage. The remaining part of this document describes how to implement an operation class using both the C++ API and Python API.
```

Operation Class
###############

To add your custom operation, create a new class that extends ``ov::Op``, which is in turn derived from ``ov::Node``, the base class for all graph operations in OpenVINO™. To add ``ov::Op``, include the next file:

.. tab-set::
   
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.hpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:common_include]
   
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:common_include]

Follow the steps below to add a custom operation:

1. Define the operation type information:

   a. For the C++ API, add the ``OPENVINO_OP`` macro which defines a ``NodeTypeInfo`` object that identifies the type of the operation to the graph users and helps with dynamic type resolution. The type info of an operation currently consists of a string operation identifier and a string for operation version.

>    b. For the Python API, define the ``class_type_info`` attribute in your custom operation class. This attribute should be an instance of ``DiscreteTypeInfo``, encapsulating both the operation name, which serves as a unique string identifier, and the operation version or namespace, represented as a second string.

Reviewer 2: So should it be a class field and also a function or only one is enough? See another comment in the snippet.

Author: removed that part as now it's not obligatory to set DiscreteTypeInfo in python

* Default constructor, which enables you to create an operation without attributes
* Constructor that creates and validates an operation with specified inputs and attributes

.. tab-set::
   

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:ctor]
>    
>    .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
>          :language: python
>          :fragment: [op:ctor]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:ctor]
  
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:ctor]
```

``validate_and_infer_types()``
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

``ov::Node::validate_and_infer_types`` method validates operation attributes and calculates output shapes using attributes of the operation.

.. tab-set::
   

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:validate]
>    
>    .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
>          :language: python
>          :fragment: [op:validate]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:validate]
   
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:validate]
```

``clone_with_new_inputs()``
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

``ov::Node::clone_with_new_inputs`` method creates a copy of the operation with new inputs.

.. tab-set::
   

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:copy]
>    
>    .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
>          :language: python
>          :fragment: [op:copy]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:copy]
   
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:copy]
```

``visit_attributes()``
++++++++++++++++++++++

``ov::Node::visit_attributes`` method enables you to visit all operation attributes.

.. tab-set::
   

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:visit_attributes]
>    
>    .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
>          :language: python
>          :fragment: [op:visit_attributes]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:visit_attributes]
   
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:visit_attributes]
```

``evaluate() and has_evaluate()``
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

``ov::Node::evaluate`` method enables you to apply constant folding to an operation.

.. tab-set::

>    .. tab-item:: C++
>       :sync: cpp
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
>          :language: cpp
>          :fragment: [op:evaluate]
>    
>    .. tab-item:: Python
>       :sync: py
> 
>       .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
>          :language: python
>          :fragment: [op:evaluate]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. tab-item:: Python
      :sync: py

      .. doxygensnippet:: docs/articles_en/assets/snippets/ov_custom_op.py
         :language: python
         :fragment: [op:evaluate]
   
   .. tab-item:: C++
      :sync: cpp

      .. doxygensnippet:: src/core/template_extension/identity.cpp
         :language: cpp
         :fragment: [op:evaluate]
```
